doc: add documentation for `pkgs.{substitute,substituteAll,substituteAllFiles}` (#326383)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/packages/build-support.md

# Build Support {#sec-build-support}

## `pkgs.substitute` {#pkgs-substitute}

`pkgs.substitute` is a wrapper around [the `substitute` function](#fun-substitute) provided by the
stdenv. It replaces strings in `src` as specified by the `substitutions` argument.

Whereas in a build script, one might call `substitute $infile $outfile --replace-fail @foo@
${foopkg}/bin/foo`, one might accomplish this with `pkgs.substitute` as such:

```nix
{ substitute, foopkg }:
substitute {
  src = ./sourcefile.txt;
  substitutions = [
    "--replace"
    "@foo@"
    "${foopkg}/bin/foo"
  ];
}
```

> ## `pkgs.substituteAll` {#pkgs-substituteall}

Reviewer: we need a clear warning that uppercase vars and illegal identifiers (e.g. names with hyphens) are ignored

Author: Agreed! Will fix soon.

Author: How's that?

Reviewer: Maybe it should be restated in the affirmative form?

```
As this uses the `substituteAll` function, its limitations also apply here,
meaning that variables must:

- start with a lowercase letter
- only contain alphanumeric characters or `_`
```

Author: Yes, I agree! updated.

# Build Support {#sec-build-support}

## `pkgs.substitute` {#pkgs-substitute}

> `pkgs.substitute` is a wrapper around [the `substitute` function](#fun-substitute) provided by the

Reviewer 2: I'd think this is an implementation detail. Ask: "Does the user of the function need to know it."

The important part is, if it is an alias / provides the same functionality. But ... (what is different) is the important thing

Author: This sentence was mostly used to help reference the reader to the additional documentation, in case they (like myself) are relatively new to nix and may not know about alternative approaches to solve the same problem. Shall I remove it?

Reviewer 2: I 'd use one of the predefined classes to put this into an note block.

```suggestion
:::{.note}
`pkgs.substitute` is a wrapper around [the `substitute` function](#fun-substitute) provided by the
...
:::
```

https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/doc/README.md#link-reference-definitions

stdenv. It replaces strings in `src` as specified by the `substitutions` argument.

> Whereas in a build script, one might call `substitute $infile $outfile --replace-fail @foo@

Reviewer 2: I find this sentence a little unnecessary hard to grasp. 
```suggestion
In a build script the line:

`substitute $infile $outfile --replace-fail @foo@

is equivalent to:
```

${foopkg}/bin/foo`, one might accomplish this with `pkgs.substitute` as such:

```nix
{ substitute, foopkg }:
substitute {
  src = ./sourcefile.txt;
  substitutions = [
    "--replace"
    "@foo@"
    "${foopkg}/bin/foo"
  ];
}
```

## `pkgs.substituteAll` {#pkgs-substituteall}

`pkgs.substituteAll` is a wrapper around [the `substituteAll` function](#fun-substituteAll) provided

> by the stdenv. It substitutes all instances of `@varName@` in `src` with the value of environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by the stdenv. It substitutes all instances of `@varName@` ( `@`s included  )  in the file `src` with the value of the corresponding environment
```

Author: Personally I find this less clear, but I'm happy to include it -- sometimes it's hard to put myself into the shoes of a reader!

> variable `varName`. As this uses the `substituteAll` function, its limitations also apply here,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
variable `varName`. As this uses the `substituteAll` function, it has the following limitations:
```

Reviewer 2: Also: isn't that already documented in stdenv `substituteAll` ? We should only maintain those in one place.

Reviewer: shall we link to that section then?

Author: I'm unclear if you're recommending that I copy the limitations from above, or if that I should remove them because they're already a duplication of existing documentation. I may have misunderstood, but the prior reviewer seems to indicate that I should include them there: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/326383#discussion_r1677007698 -- would a link to the existing function be your preference?

Reviewer 2: > would a link to the existing function be your preference

That one i think.

Limitations see [link](...)

meaning that variables that you want to replace must:

- start with a *lowercase* letter
- only contain characters that are alphanumeric or `_`

For example, if `say-goodbye.sh` contained the following:

```
#! @bash@/bin/bash

echo @unchanged@
@hello@/bin/hello --greeting @greeting@
```

the following derivation would make substitutions to `@bash@`, `@hello@`, and `@greeting@`:

```nix
{
  substituteAll,
  bash,
  hello,
}:
substituteAll {
  src = ./say-goodbye.sh;

>   inherit bash hello;

Reviewer 2: It's kind of ill advised to specify environment variable at the top-level, the user could get unexpected results, when accidentially choosing a name that clashes with one of the mkDerivation arguments.
```suggestion
  env = {
    inherit bash hello;
  };
```

Author: I'd love more explanation here if you have time -- shouldn't `greeting = "goodbye";` also go into `env` by the same logic?

  greeting = "goodbye";
}
```

such that `$out` would result in something like the following:

```
#! /nix/store/s30jrpgav677fpc9yvkqsib70xfmx7xi-bash-5.2p26/bin/bash

echo @unchanged@
/nix/store/566f5isbvw014h7knmzmxa5l6hshx43k-hello-2.12.1/bin/hello --greeting goodbye
```

## `pkgs.substituteAllFiles` {#pkgs-substituteallfiles}

> Like `pkgs.substituteAll`, `pkgs.substituteAllFiles` is a wrapper around [the `substituteAll`

Reviewer 2: Do i need to read substituteAll first ?
Would be nice if documentation arcticles are atomic.
```suggestion
`pkgs.substituteAllFiles` is a wrapper around [the `substituteAll`
```

Author: Yes, I would recommend that readers read it first. Should I make that explicit? Also, above you suggested that I remove the analogous sentence entirely (as an "implementation detail") -- perhaps I should just remove it here as well?

Reviewer 2: Yes. It should be consistent, whatever we decided, should also apply to this  place.

> function](#fun-substituteAll) provided by the stdenv. It funtions similarly by replacing `@varName@`

Reviewer 2: Don't assume, that i've read the other articles. explain from zero.

with the value of the environment variable `varName`, however it expects `src` to be a directory
and requires a `files` argument that specifies which files will be subject to replacements; only
these files will be placed in `$out`.

As it also uses the `substituteAll` function, it is subject to the same limitations on environment
variables as discussed above in [pkgs.substituteAll](#pkgs-substituteall).

For example, if the current directory contains `{foo,bar,baz}.txt` and the following `default.nix`

```nix
{ substituteAllFiles }:
substituteAllFiles {
  src = ./.;
  files = [
    "foo.txt"
    "bar.txt"
  ];
  hello = "there";
}
```

> one would expect to find every instance of `@hello@` to be replaced with `there` in `$out/foo.txt`

Reviewer 2: Can you use passive voice. Describe the actual output that the function produces.
e,g,

> every instance of `@hello@` will be replaced with `there` in `$out/foo.txt` and `$out/bar.txt`
> `baz.txt` wont be processed nor will it appear in `$out`.

Author: I think you mean active voice -- yes, happy to make that change.

# Build Support {#sec-build-support}

## `pkgs.substitute` {#pkgs-substitute}

> `pkgs.substitute` is a wrapper around [the `substitute` function](#fun-substitute) provided by the
> stdenv. It replaces strings in `src` as specified by the `substitutions` argument.

Reviewer 3: "The stdenv" is not a meaningful expression. Either say "the standard environment" if you mean the set of environment variables and Bash functions provided to derivations, or say `stdenv` if your mean that code object. In this case it we should make clear it's about the first. I actually misinterpreted it on the first pass!

```suggestion
`pkgs.substitute` is a wrapper around [the `substitute` Bash function](#fun-substitute) in the standard environment.
It replaces strings in `src` as specified by the `substitutions` argument.
```

Please wrap lines at each sentence, this makes suggestions easier to make for reviews and easier to read for you. This is a general rule in all Nix-related documentation.

> In a build script, the line:

Reviewer 3: Please use `:::{.example}` blocks for all examples. This makes them more discoverable in the examples section, and easier to discern in the text body.

```bash
substitute $infile $outfile --replace-fail @foo@ ${foopkg}/bin/foo
```

is equivalent to:

```nix
{ substitute, foopkg }:
substitute {
  src = ./sourcefile.txt;
  substitutions = [
    "--replace"
    "@foo@"
    "${foopkg}/bin/foo"
  ];
}
```

## `pkgs.substituteAll` {#pkgs-substituteall}

`pkgs.substituteAll` substitutes all instances of `@varName@` (`@`s included)
in file file `src` with the value of the corresponding environment variable. As

> this uses the `substituteAll` function, its limitations regarding variable names
> that will or will not be replaced also apply here, and familiarity with [the
> function's documentation](#fun-substitute) is recommended.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this uses the [`substituteAll`] (#fun-substitute) function, its limitations regarding variable names that will or will not be replaced also apply here.
```

Please don't conceal the origin of recommendations with passive voice. Also I recommend against recommendations in a reference manual. We can just link to authoritative information, the reader can expect to find anything they may still be missing there, and we should expect readers to read what they need. If that's not clear enough, in a different effort we may introduce this convention explicitly.

Also, more words is not always more better. Reference material primarily needs to be scannable for what one needs. Lots of prose tends to obscure key information, so we should try to optimize for brevity and clarity.

For example, if `say-goodbye.sh` contained the following:

```
#! @bash@/bin/bash

echo @unchanged@
@hello@/bin/hello --greeting @greeting@
```

the following derivation would make substitutions to `@bash@`, `@hello@`, and `@greeting@`:

```nix
{
  substituteAll,
  bash,
  hello,
}:
substituteAll {
  src = ./say-goodbye.sh;
  env = {
    inherit bash hello;
    greeting = "goodbye";
  };
}
```

such that `$out` would result in something like the following:

```
#! /nix/store/s30jrpgav677fpc9yvkqsib70xfmx7xi-bash-5.2p26/bin/bash

echo @unchanged@
/nix/store/566f5isbvw014h7knmzmxa5l6hshx43k-hello-2.12.1/bin/hello --greeting goodbye
```

## `pkgs.substituteAllFiles` {#pkgs-substituteallfiles}

`pkgs.substituteAllFiles` replaces `@varName@` with the value of the environment
variable `varName`. It expects `src` to be a directory and requires a `files`
argument that specifies which files will be subject to replacements; only these
files will be placed in `$out`.

As it also uses the `substituteAll` function, it is subject to the same limitations on environment

> variables as discussed in [pkgs.substituteAll](#pkgs-substituteall).

Reviewer 3: As mentioned by @hsjobeki, don't expect prior knowledge or any particular order of presentation (it's still planned to break the manual into pages, things like "prior" or "above" won't make sense there). We can assume most readers will end up right here through some link. Just link to related information directly, using a self-explanatory link text.

Author: The highlighted portion is indeed a link and the words `prior` and `above` don't appear in this file at all -- was this just a general admonition? Sorry if I'm missing your suggestion here.

# Build Support {#sec-build-support}

## `pkgs.substitute` {#pkgs-substitute}

`pkgs.substitute` is a wrapper around [the `substitute` function](#fun-substitute) provided by the
stdenv. It replaces strings in `src` as specified by the `substitutions` argument.

In a build script, the line:

```bash
substitute $infile $outfile --replace-fail @foo@ ${foopkg}/bin/foo
```

is equivalent to:

```nix
{ substitute, foopkg }:
substitute {
  src = ./sourcefile.txt;
  substitutions = [
    "--replace"
    "@foo@"
    "${foopkg}/bin/foo"
  ];
}
```

## `pkgs.substituteAll` {#pkgs-substituteall}

`pkgs.substituteAll` substitutes all instances of `@varName@` (`@`s included)

> in file file `src` with the value of the corresponding environment variable. As

Reviewer 2: Somehow duplicate, maybe because i did a wrong suggestion.

```suggestion
in file `src` with the value of the corresponding environment variable. As
```

Reviewer 3: Still there

this uses the `substituteAll` function, its limitations also apply here, meaning
that variables that you want to replace must:

- start with a *lowercase* letter
- only contain characters that are alphanumeric or `_`

For example, if `say-goodbye.sh` contained the following:

```
#! @bash@/bin/bash

echo @unchanged@
@hello@/bin/hello --greeting @greeting@
```

the following derivation would make substitutions to `@bash@`, `@hello@`, and `@greeting@`:

```nix
{
  substituteAll,
  bash,
  hello,
}:
substituteAll {
  src = ./say-goodbye.sh;
  env = {
    inherit bash hello;
  };
  greeting = "goodbye";
}
```

such that `$out` would result in something like the following:

```
#! /nix/store/s30jrpgav677fpc9yvkqsib70xfmx7xi-bash-5.2p26/bin/bash

echo @unchanged@
/nix/store/566f5isbvw014h7knmzmxa5l6hshx43k-hello-2.12.1/bin/hello --greeting goodbye
```

## `pkgs.substituteAllFiles` {#pkgs-substituteallfiles}

`pkgs.substituteAllFiles` replaces `@varName@` with the value of the environment

> variable `varName`, however it expects `src` to be a directory and requires a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
variable `varName`. It expects `src` to be a directory and requires a
```

`files` argument that specifies which files will be subject to replacements;
only these files will be placed in `$out`.

As it also uses the `substituteAll` function, it is subject to the same limitations on environment
variables as discussed above in [pkgs.substituteAll](#pkgs-substituteall).

For example, if the current directory contains `{foo,bar,baz}.txt` and the following `default.nix`

```nix
{ substituteAllFiles }:
substituteAllFiles {
  src = ./.;
  files = [
    "foo.txt"
    "bar.txt"
  ];
  hello = "there";
}
```

> in the resulting derivaiton, every instance of `@hello@` will be replaced with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the resulting derivation, every instance of `@hello@` will be replaced with
```
